you're listening to a teaching from Reality LA.
In a world that is full of darkness and despair, the season of Advent is an annual reminder that we have real reasons for hope, that true peace is possible, that there is a joy that is full and lasting, and that true love exists, because we have a God who is on mission to dwell with his people.
as Pastor Goodwin preached on the first week of Advent, Sin may have cursed the world with brokenness and death, but God promised in the garden that one day the seat of the woman would come and crush the serpent's head, bringing a reversal to that curse.
And so we have real reasons for hope.
And then last week, Pastor Nathan reminded us that the true peace is possible.
even when our adversaries are at our door threatening to destroy us because we have a God who hears, who hears the cries of his people and rescues them.
And then next week, we're gonna see that true love exists when we see the God the Father sent his only begotten son, Jesus, into our world to make a way for God to finally dwell with us forever.
And today, today I wanna talk to you about joy.
joy that comes when God makes a way for himself to dwell with us.
A joy that not even winning a second world series championship in a row could bring.
It is in fact, it is a fact that the worse the condition and the deeper the despair, the greater the remedy and the more powerful the rescue has to be to reverse that condition.
And well, the people of God that Ezekiel was writing to were probably in the darkest time of their national history.
And so if God is going to say something that would give him joy, it would have to be the most incredible thing that they would have ever heard.
I mean, they had just survived the horrors of a year-long siege in Jerusalem.
They watched the city and the temple burn to the ground.
They had just been torn from their homes and dragged across to a foreign land, to the land of Babylon.
They were completely separated from the presence of their God.
They were in a really, really dark place.
And so what does God promise to do that would restore the people into His presence, to lift them up from their despair, and to fill their hearts with the fullness of joy?
Well, would you turn with me to what
He says to Ezekiel in Ezekiel 37.
So turn with me in your Bible so Ezekiel 37 verses 15 to 28.
And this is what Ezekiel writes.
The word of the Lord came to me, son of man, take a stick and write on it for Judah and the people of Israel associated with him.
Then take another stick and write on it.
for Joseph, the sick of Ephraim, and all the house of Israel associated with him.
And join them one to another into one stick that they may become one in your hand.
And when your people say to you, would you not tell us what you mean by these?
Say to them, does says the Lord God, behold, I am about to take the stick of Joseph that is in the hand of Ephraim and the tribes of Israel associated with him.
And I will join it with the stick of Judah and make them one stick that they may be one in my hand.
When the sticks on which you write are in your hand before their eyes, then say to them, does says the Lord God, behold, I will take the people of Israel from the nations among which they have gone.
And I will gather them from all around and bring them to their own land.
And I will make them one nation in the land on the mountains of Israel.
and one king shall be king over them all, and they shall be no longer two nations, and no longer divided into two kingdoms.
They shall not defile themselves any more with their idols and their testable things, or with any of their transgressions, but I will save them from all the backslidings in which they have sinned, and I will cleanse them, and they shall be my people, and I will be their God."
My servant David shall be king over them, and they shall all have one shepherd
They shall walk in my rules and be careful to obey my statutes.
They shall dwell in the land that I gave to my servant Jacob, where your fathers lived.
They and their children and their children's children shall dwell there forever.
And David, my servant, shall be their prince forever.
I will make a covenant of peace with them.
It shall be an everlasting covenant with them.
And I will set them in their land and multiply them.
And I will set my sanctuary in their midst forevermore.
My dwelling place shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people.
Then the nations will know that I am the Lord who sanctifies Israel, where my sanctuary is in their midst forevermore.
Would you take a moment and pray with me?
Heavenly Father, even as I stand here in front of you and before your people,
Lord, I confess that I am feeble and weak, but you, you are strong and mighty to save.
Would you empower me by the power of your Holy Spirit to make more of you and of your son Jesus?
May your words do a good and sanctifying work in our hearts and minds that we may be a people full of joy and worthy of your holy name.
For we pray this in the mattress name of our separate king, Jesus, amen.
Well, as we were reading that passage,
It was one thing that stood out to me as God was speaking to the people of Israel.
And it was this one little phrase that kept being repeated over and over and over again.
Did you guys notice what it was?
Did you kind of catch it a little bit?
Well, over and over, for 11 times, God says, I will.
I will do something.
Not once does he tell Israel that they would have to do anything.
There's nothing conditional about the promises that God is making to the people of Israel.
All his promises are purely a gift.
And did the people of Judah deserve these gifts?
No, not at all.
After all, the reason why Ezekiel records the spirit of God leaving the temple in Ezekiel 10
And then records in Ezekiel 21 God declaring that he is going to be raising up the king of Babylon to bring judgment on the nation is because of the depravity of their sins against God.
Their wickedness and their worship of foreign gods even within the temple itself made them unbearable to be for God to be with.
And so God leaves this dwelling place that had been defiled by these people that was in their midst and he punishes them
what they're rebelling against him by sending them into exile away from his land.
They earned their judgment.
They deserve the wrath of God that they were experiencing.
And yet, God who is infinite in his grace promises to give them a gift that they did not deserve.
The gift of restoration and of covenant renewal so that he could dwell in their midst once more.
For people languishing in the dark consequences of their sin, this gracious promise to reverse their current condition is the only thing God can say that would give them hope and joy.
And to make this happen, God makes a series of promises beginning with the promise of salvation.
But the salvation that God promises to give is not the salvation from the Babylonians that the people were hoping for.
That would have simply just changed their circumstances.
And it would not have prevented them from repeating their sin and being punished with exile another time.
For restoration to happen, it has to be an even greater salvation than that, than simply being rescued from the Babylonians.
And so God makes an incredible promise in verse 23.
They shall not defile themselves anymore with their idols and with their detestable things or with any of their transgressions.
But I will save them from all the backslidings in which they have sinned.
God knows exactly what the people of Judah needed.
They thought they needed salvation from the Babylonians.
But what God knows is that they really needed salvation from their sins.
They were trapped in the pit of sin
which is why they kept back sliding.
You know, David writes in Psalm 40, verse two, he says, he, God drew me up from the pit of destruction out of the mirey bog, that slimy pit of mud and mire.
And he set my foot on a rock, making my steps secure.
What an appropriate image of the human sinful condition.
We are stuck in this pit of muck and mire with no solid footing.
And as try as hard as we can, we are unable to pull ourselves out of that pit.
Instead, all we do is keep falling back into that pit of sin over and over and again.
We keep backsliding into that pit, unable to move forward out of the pit, unable to save ourselves.
We are in desperate need of rescue.
And God in his compassion and mercy sees us, and he reaches out, and he draws us out of that my repeat of sin.
And in the greatest act of kindness, He sets our feet on solid ground, the solid ground of His righteousness so that we would no longer walk in sin.
What an incredible gift this gift of salvation for sin.
What joy we experience when a sin that keeps dragging us down, that keeps ruining our lives, that keeps destroying our relationships is finally removed from our lives.
What joy there is when we are finally freed from the sin that enslaves us.
That's an incredible promise.
But wait, there's more.
I feel like an infocommerseal.
But this is true.
There is more.
Verse 23 continues.
And he says, I will save them from all their backslidings and I will cleanse them.
God promises that after rescuing his people from the miry sin,
He doesn't just leave them in their broken and defiled state.
He promises to cleanse them of all of their uncleanness.
This gift is more than just a quick rinse under a hose because the ravages of sin goes far deeper than just a skin level.
Sin goes into the very fabric of the human nature.
It goes into the very fabric of our souls.
You know, J.A.
or Tolkien,
in the Lord of the Rings series, captures the ravaging effects of sin perfectly with the devolution of the hobbit Simegal into that vile and decrepit creature of shadow and filth Gollum, whose body and psyche are both slowly mutated and destroyed over the centuries by the corrupting influence of the One Ring.
since corrupting effect is much more pervasive than just being limited to a single individual.
It actually affects entire communities.
And God speaks to this in the opening verses of a passage when he tells Ezekiel to get two sticks to represent the fractured kingdom of Israel.
God and his mission to dwell once more with humanity after the fall.
God chose to make a covenant with one man, Abraham, and with his family, that they would be his people, and he would be their God, and he would dwell with them, and through them, the rest of the world would be blessed.
The birthright of this divine covenant is then inherited by Abraham's grandson, Jacob, whose name gets changed later to Israel.
Now, Jacob fell in love with a girl named Rachel,
and got permission to marry her from her father, Laban.
But on their wedding night, Laban does a little switcheroo and substitutes Rachel with her older sister, Leah, who was not very attractive, at least not to Jacob.
But Jacob doesn't realize this until the next morning because he's so ecstatic about being married to the love of his life, Rachel.
And then until the next morning when he realizes that wasn't Rachel.
But the marriage was also already consummated.
So when he confronts Laban, Laban makes up some lame excuse, but then gives Jacob Rachel to be his wife as well.
Now the problem is that while Leia was unloved, she was able to have a lot of children.
And Rachel, while she was loved by Jacob, was not able to bear any children.
And this led to a lot of conflict and jealousy within the family.
And when God finally opened Rachel's womb, she gave birth to her son.
Joseph.
And Joseph, being Rachel's son, became the favorite son among the 11 boys that Jacob had at the time.
And then later on Rachel would give birth to the second son, her second son Benjamin, bringing the count to 12.
So, because Joseph was his favorite son, Jacob decided to give the birthright to his divine covenant to Joseph.
And he indicates this to the chagrin of his 10 older brothers by giving Joseph a special coat.
And then the conflict and the jealousy of the mom spread to the sons and the 10 older sons plot to get rid of Joseph.
At first they were just gonna kill him and dump his body.
But then they decided to make a little money off of him.
And so they decided to sell him to some slave traders who eventually take Joseph to Egypt.
And while in Egypt,
Joseph experiences God's favor, probably because of the birthright that was given to him, and he goes from being a slave to the second in command of Egypt, who saves the world from starvation during a worldwide famine.
And Joseph is given the daughter of an Egyptian high priest to be his wife, and they have two sons, Manasseh and Ephraim.
Eventually, Jacob's family becomes reunited with Joseph, and they all live in Egypt under Joseph's protection.
And when Jacob was about to die, he calls his sons to bless them.
And he blesses his sons, each of them giving an individual blessing, but he gives a double portion to Joseph by blessing Manasseh and Ephraim as his own sons.
And that's how Manasseh and Ephraim become two of the 12 tribes of Israel.
And fast forward, about 500 years, and Solomon is on the throne, having succeeded his father David.
Both David and Solomon are from the tribe of Judah.
They're descendants of the fourth son of Jacob, who Jacob had blessed to be the royal tribe.
And Solomon then embarks on this massive building campaign, building the temple and making the city of Jerusalem the marvel of the known world.
But this endeavors severely attacks the people of Israel.
And when Solomon dies, the 10 tribes that were located to the north of Jerusalem
asked Solomon's son to give them some relief, but he refuses, and attend northern tribes, led by the tribe of Ephraim, rebel against Judah in the south, and they become their own kingdom.
Only the tiny tribe of Benjamin, who is also located in the south, remain with Judah.
And thus, these two become the kingdom of Judah.
And then over the next several hundred years, these two kingdoms,
even though they're related by flesh and blood with war and plot against each other, until the northern kingdom, sometimes known as Ephraim because it was the most dominant tribe, until the northern kingdom is judged by God for her wickedness and given to be conquered and scattered around the world by the Assyrian Empire.
And then about 140 years later, God also judges the southern kingdom, the kingdom of Judah, for her wickedness
and send the Babylonians to conquer them and send them into exile.
What we see in this brief synopsis of the history of Israel is that sin had led to conflict and jealousy so deep that brothers would actually plot the murder of their own brother and relatives would take up arms and go to battle against their own flesh and blood.
Sin destroyed the natural love of family
and turn it into bloody warfare and political intrigue that lasted centuries.
This is just one of the way that sin had defiled and defiled and destroyed the people of Israel.
This is one of the way that sin bore a great shame upon them among all the nations.
And God alludes to this whole sordid history when he tells Ezekiel to take a stick and to name it Joseph.
And another stick and name it Judah.
But then he does this incredible and miraculous things.
He joins the sticks together and he makes them one and he calls that stick Israel.
What God is promising to do is that he's promising to cleanse his people from the effects of their sin.
He is promising to transform them from being two separate enemy nations who has such ingrained hatred and distrustful each other that they could not get along no matter what was being done for them.
He was going to turn these two nations back again into one nation and one family united by the deep bond of brotherly love.
That's an incredible thing that God will cleanse them and heal them from the deep ravages of sin.
What an amazing gift God is promising to give them.
And when God cleanses us are the things that defile us.
God is a shame.
God is a regret.
God is the pain and we get to experience the joy of being fully forgiven.
The joy of being fully restored.
The joy of having a fresh start and a new beginning.
That's the gift that God is promising to give to us.
And after preparing for himself a clean and holy people, God promises to bring the people of Israel back home.
As exiles, the people of Israel were homeless.
They were living in a land that was foreign to them.
The language, the culture, the customs, the foods, they were all strange.
Memories of their home created a yearning to return, so they never really felt settled in this foreign land.
The Babylonians treated them as foreigners.
further adding to their feelings of not belonging.
But most of all, they knew their ancestral history.
They knew how God had made a covenant with their family, choosing them to become his nation, his people, to serve and worship him and to be his instruments of blessings to the rest of the world.
And not being in their ancestral home meant they were not where they were meant to be.
They were not doing what they were meant to do and created to do.
And it is into this feeling of not belonging, of being unsettled, that God promises to gather all the people of Israel who have been scattered all over the world and bring them back to the land that they belong in, to the land of Israel, where they and all their subsequent generations will live in peace forever.
And this is what he says in verse 25.
They showed dwell in the land that I gave my servant Jacob, where your fathers lived.
They and their children and their children's children shall dwell there forever.
And by identifying the land as a land given to his servant, Jacob, God is calling to mind a covenant that he made with Jacob in Genesis 28, when Jacob was running away from his brother Esau, whom he had cheated.
When Jacob was running away from his father, Isaac, whom he deceived in order to get that birthright to the divine covenant.
But as Jacob is on the run, God comes to him in a dream in the middle of the night to confirm that Jacob had that right to the divine covenant, even though he received it through deception.
And God tells Jacob that while he may be on the run right now, because of his sins, God is promising him that he will return him to this land after his exile.
because this is the land that God has declared that Jacob and his descendants are to live in, and this is where they belong.
And because God fulfilled his promise, this promise to Jacob, the people of Israel could trust God would also fulfill his promise to bring them back to their hereditary land, to the homeland that they belong after their time in exile for their sins.
And there is this deep joy when you're finally where you're supposed to be.
Belonging creates joy because the fills are in need for deep connection.
It gives stability and safety, and it gives us a sense of purpose and meaning.
And when we are home, we know that everything is well.
And to keep the people united and living right, righteously in the land that he gave them, God promises to send his servant David, who will be their shepherd king, so that they would never be removed from the land again.
And this is what he says in verse 22.
And one king shall be king over them all.
And they shall be no longer two nations and no longer divided into two kingdoms.
They shall not defile themselves anymore with their idols and their detestable things or with any of their transgressions.
And in verse 24, he's a little bit more specific.
My servant David shall be king over them and they shall all have one shepherd.
They shall walk in my rules and be careful to obey my statutes.
Unlike the rulers and shepherds that God had condemned in the beginning of the book of Ezekiel, the leaders who had abused their authority in order to gain personal gain, this king would be God's faithful and obedient servant.
This king would united God's people and make them one nation.
He would be obedient to God faithfully keeping all of God's commands and leading his people to do the same.
But this king would also be a good shepherd.
A good shepherd who feeds his flock, heals the sick and wounded, seeks out the loss and brings them back to the flock.
And this good shepherd is willing to lay down his life for his flock.
And he is called David because he is a descendant of the house of David.
But this is no ordinary man because his rule will last forever.
And there's only one person.
Only one person who can fit this description, the Messiah, Jesus Christ.
Jesus is from the tribe of Judah.
He is a descendant of David.
He is the faithful servant of God, obedient to God, even to the point of death on the cross, as he prayed in the God earnings, Gethsemane, not my will, but your will be done.
But then, having been resurrected from the dead, Jesus now sits on the throne, ruling forever.
Jesus is also the good shepherd who healed the sick and the wounded, who fed his flock when they were hungry, who sought the loss, and restored them to the flock of God.
And just as David is no ordinary, just as Jesus is no ordinary Davidic king, because his reign will last forever, Jesus is also no ordinary shepherd.
Because his sheep are not only from the people of Israel.
In John 10, verse 14, Jesus declares, I am the good shepherd.
I know my own and my own known me.
Just as the father knows me and I know the father, and I lay down my life for the sheep,
And I have other sheep that are not of this fold.
I must bring them also, and they will listen to my voice.
So there will be one flock, one shepherd.
As the greater David, Jesus will not just join the two sticks of Joseph and Judah, but he would join the two sticks of Israel and the Gentiles.
And this is amazing news, a great joy for most of us here in this room, because most of us here are of the Gentile sticks.
And because of Jesus, we get to participate in the blessings of being God's people.
And with his people back in their land and a Davidic Shepherd King installed as their prince forever, God makes his final promise, the promise of his presence with his people.
Verse 26, I will make a covenant of peace with them.
It shall be an everlasting covenant with them.
And I will set them in their land and multiply them.
and I will set my sanctuary in their midst forever.
My dwelling place shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people."
And this, my friends, is why joy can be full and lasting.
Because the Psalms tell us that God's presence is a source of pure, unadulterated joy.
In Psalm 16, verse 11, it says,
God, you have made known to me the path of life.
In your presence there is fullness of joy.
At your right hand are pleasures forevermore.
It is in God's presence that we experience lasting joy towards fullness.
Joy is possible because Jesus is our shepherd king who laid down his life to make us God's people.
Joy is available because God has saved us from sin and cleansed us of all of its defilement.
Joy is real because God's presence is real.
Joy is full because God is fully good and beautiful.
And joy is lasting because God has covenanted to be with us forever.
And as we close, I just want to say to you that you can be confident
that everything God has promised, this renewed obedience of God's people forever, this return to the land forever, the reign of the Davidic king forever, and the dwelling of God with his people forever.
All of these things that God has promised here, he will do it because God has tied his name.
He has tied his reputation to this, that he is the God who saves.
Look at me again with me again at verse 24 on.
My servant David shall be king over them and they shall all have one shepherd.
They shall walk in my rules and be careful to obey my statutes.
They shall dwell in the land that I gave to my servant Jacob where your fathers lived.
They and their children and their children's children shall dwell there forever and David my servant shall be their prince forever.
I will make a covenant a peace with them.
It shall be everlasting covenant with them, and I will set them in their land and multiply them, and will set my sanctuary in their midst forever.
My dwelling place shall be with them, and I will be their God, and they shall be my people."
Then the nations will know that I am the Lord who sanctifies Israel when my sanctuary is in their midst forevermore.
God's work of salvation for Israel and for the church is motivated by his desire to save the world.
When the nations see God's sanctuary in the midst of his people, they will know that God has the power to save.
Just look at how evil Israel was and the salvation that God has wrought within those people.
And the nations will turn to God for their salvation as well.
And so I want to encourage you to live lives that are obedient to God because you have been saved from the myry pit and cleanse of your guilt and shame.
I want to encourage you to live lives that are characterized by joy because you are in God's presence.
And in His presence, there is fullness of joy.
And then I also want to encourage you to share the good news of Jesus during this Advent season so that our joy may be may complete.
as souls are saved and nations join the flock of God.
Let's pray.
Graces, Heavenly Father, you are so good.
You are the absolute most beautiful thing in the world.
And we're so grateful for your work of salvation in our midst, for the promises that you make, these big, big forever promises
and how you have already brought them to fulfillment through your son Jesus Christ.
And that one day we're gonna have the ultimate fulfillment when he comes again.
And until that comes, we're gonna wait, we're gonna wait anticipating, we're gonna wait obediently, we're gonna wait resting in your presence, experience the joy of being with you.
Lord, we're just so grateful for all that you do for us.
And we pray that as you sanctify us, that the world may see and know that you're a God who saves.
that you're a God who sanctifies, and they can receive salvation as well.
So Lord, we just pray that you would make our joy complete as we make your joy full.
And in Jesus' name, we pray.
Amen.